README.md, before:


![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue)
![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Project-Completed-brightgreen)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Academic--Use-yellow)

This project analyses patterns of self-reported anxiety using the open-access DASS-21 survey from Open Psychometrics (~39,000 respondents worldwide). It implements a fully reproducible Python pipeline that:

- cleans and standardises the raw survey data,
- produces descriptive statistics and visualisations,
- fits and compares three regression models (Linear Regression, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting) to predict anxiety scores,
- exports all figures and tables used in the technical report.

The goal is to understand how anxiety relates to demographics, personality traits (TIPI), and co-occurring symptoms (stress, depression), while being explicit about sampling and non-response bias.

## Main Features

- Clean, **modular** Python codebase (`src/` package) following best practices.
- End-to-end pipeline runnable with a **single command**.
- Automated visualisations:
  - histograms and boxplots (overall distribution, gender, age, TIPI traits, etc.),
  - geographic plots (world map by country, barplot by continent),
  - regression coefficient forest plots,
  - Random-Forest feature-importance barplot.
- Export of statistical tables in **CSV**, **PDF** and **LaTeX** formats.
- Three **regression** models for continuous anxiety scores:
  - **Linear Regression** (baseline),
  - **Random Forest** with inverse-frequency gender weights,
  - **Gradient Boosting Regressor**;
  all using the same set of predictors:
  - psychological variables (DASS Stress/Depression, TIPI traits),
  - demographic variables (gender, age group, education, urbanicity, etc.).
- Small but focused **pytest** test suite for key components.


## Setup & Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 (tested on macOS and Nuvolos/Linux)
- Python 3.10+ should work, but 3.11 is recommended

- Recommended: use a virtual environment (`venv` or `conda`)


### Installation

#### Option A — Using conda (recommended on Nuvolos)

```bash
conda create -n anxiety_ds python=3.11
conda activate anxiety_ds
git clone https://github.com/vrelvape/mental-health-anxiety-dass21.git
cd mental-health-anxiety-dass21
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
#### Option B — Using venv (generic)
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
git clone https://github.com/vrelvape/mental-health-anxiety-dass21.git
cd mental-health-anxiety-dass21
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Input data files

### 1. Main survey CSV

The main survey dataset used in this project is stored as:

- `data/mental_health_survey.csv`

If you are working from a fresh clone and this file is missing (for example, if the raw data was removed for privacy or size reasons), you can download it again from Open Psychometrics:

> Open Psychometrics – DASS-21 dataset  
> https://openpsychometrics.org/_rawdata/

The original file from Open Psychometrics is typically named `data.csv`. 

If needed, please rename it to `mental_health_survey.csv` and place it in the `data/` directory so that the pipeline can find it.


### 2. World boundaries GeoJSON (for the map figure)

One figure in this project, the choropleth “Mean Anxiety Score by Country” requires a GeoJSON file containing country boundaries.

To enable this figure, download a world countries GeoJSON file and save it as:

- `data/geo/world_countries.geojson`

For example, from the project root you can create the folder and download a compatible file with:

```bash
mkdir -p data/geo

curl -L "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/datasets/geo-countries/master/data/countries.geojson" \
  -o data/geo/world_countries.geojson
```

## How to Run the Full Pipeline

From the project root:
### **Option 1 — Standard execution (recommended)**

```bash
python main.py

```
### **Option 2 - Module execution**
```bash
python -m src.main

```

These two commands will:
- Load and clean the dataset
- Generate summary statistics and visualizations
- Export all tables to `results/tables/` and all figures to `results/figures/`

## Testing

This project includes a small but focused test suite to ensure that the core components
of the pipeline behave as expected.

From the project root, you can run all tests with:

```bash
pytest
```
To run the tests with coverage and see which parts of the code are exercised, use:
```bash
pytest --cov=src --cov-report=term-missing
```
These commands will:
- Execute unit tests for data cleaning, feature engineering and modelling components
- Report any failures or regressions in the pipeline
- (With `--cov`): show line-by-line coverage information for the `src/` package

## Reproducing the LaTex Report

```md
Note: The PDF report is provided pre-compiled for evaluation.
Recompiling the LaTeX report is optional and not required to reproduce the results.
All figures and tables used in the report are generated automatically by running `python main.py`.
```

From the `docs/`folder:

```bash
cd docs
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
biber Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
```

## Repository Structure

```
mental-health-anxiety-dass21/
├── data/
│   └── mental_health_survey.csv        # Raw input data (DASS-21)
│
├── docs/                     
│   └── figures/                      
│   └── tables/
│   ├── Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex   # LaTeX source for the report
│   └── Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.pdf   # Final technical report (compiled locally)
│
├── results/
│   ├── figures/                       # All generated figures (PNG)
│   └── tables/                        # Exported tables
│       ├── csv/
│       ├── pdf/
│       └── latex/
│
├── src/
│   ├── analysis/                      # Statistical analysis modules
│   │   ├── anova_demographics.py
│   │   ├── anova_personality.py
│   │   ├── descriptive.py
│   │   ├── ml_models.py
│   │   ├── nonresponse.py
│   │   └── regressions.py
│   │
│   ├── viz/                           # Visualisation modules
│   │   ├── anxiety_distribution.py
│   │   ├── coef_forest_plots.py
│   │   ├── demographic_boxplots.py
│   │   ├── geo_anxiety_plots.py
│   │   ├── ml_feature_importance.py
│   │   └── tipi_boxplots.py
│   │
│   ├── cleaning.py                    # Data cleaning and harmonisation
│   ├── config.py                      # Paths, constants and settings
│   ├── data_loading.py                # Raw-data loader
│   ├── export_core_tables.py          # Table export logic
│   ├── features.py                    # Feature engineering helpers
│   └── main.py                        # Pipeline entry point (python -m src.main)
│
├── tests/                             # Pytest test suite
│   └── test_*.py
│
├── AI_USAGE.md                        # Detailed disclosure of AI usage
├── PROPOSAL.md                        # Original project proposal
├── README.md                          # (this file)
├── requirements.txt                   # Python dependencies
└── .gitignore
```

## Outputs

### Statistical Tables

- Mean anxiety by country
- Mean anxiety by continent
- Anxiety severity by age group, gender, and TIPI traits
- Top 10 countries by anxiety level and participant count
- Model comparison table (Linear Regression vs Random Forest vs Gradient Boosting: R² and RMSE)
- ANOVA summaries for:
  - demographic predictors,
  - TIPI personality traits.
Tables are saved under:
- `results/tables/csv/`
- `results/tables/pdf/`
- `results/tables/latex/`

### Visualizations

- Histograms (overall distribution)
- Boxplots (by gender, continent, etc.)
- Barplots (mean anxiety scores)
- Choropleth world map (mean anxiety by country)

All outputs are generated programmatically and stored in `results/figures/` and `results/tables/`.

![Choropleth Map of Anxiety by Country](docs/figures/worldmap_anxiety_by_country.png)


This map shows the average anxiety levels across countries.

## Version control & commit policy

The project was developed primarily in GitHub Codespaces, with most of the
work (data cleaning, refactoring of the pipeline, modelling and report-aligned
visualisations) being done interactively in a single environment.

Because the structure of the project was revised multiple times, using a very
fine-grained commit strategy would have produced a large number of noisy,
intermediate commits. Instead, the development workflow followed this logic:

- iterate and stabilise the main components directly in Codespaces,
- then publish the final version to the GitHub repository using a series of
  meaningful commits (at least 20, as requested in the project rules),
  corresponding to major milestones (data loading/cleaning, analyses,
  visualisations, modelling, documentation).

As a consequence, the commits in the final repository are relatively close in
time, and there are few commits whose sole purpose is to “fix a small bug”
immediately after the previous one. This is expected given the workflow above:
the actual development started on **5 November 2025** and took place almost
entirely in Codespaces before being pushed to GitHub in its final, structured
form.

## Known Limitations

This project is based on an online convenience sample from Open Psychometrics and is **not representative** of the global population. Some groups and regions are heavily over-represented (e.g., certain countries, women), while others have very small sample sizes.

All measures are **self-reported** and collected at a single time point, which means the analysis is correlational only and cannot establish causality. The DASS-21 subscales (stress, depression, anxiety) are also conceptually overlapping, so models that use all three should be interpreted with care.

Finally, the machine learning models are designed for **exploratory analysis**, not for clinical use or individual diagnosis. Their role is to highlight patterns and relative predictor importance, not to provide medical recommendations.

## Data Source

The dataset used in this project comes from:

> Open Psychometrics – DASS-21 dataset  
> https://openpsychometrics.org/_rawdata/

(See the technical report and `references.bib` for the full citation.)

## AI Disclosure

A detailed description of how AI tools were used during development is provided in [`AI_USAGE.md`](AI_USAGE.md). All final modelling decisions, code integration and interpretation of results were reviewed and validated by the student.

## License & Academic Use

This project is intended for **academic and educational purposes** only.  
Please cite the dataset source and this repository if you reuse parts of the pipeline.


## Author

Created by **Victor Aguiar Relva Pereira** for the *Data Science and Advanced Programming* course (HEC Lausanne, 2025–2026).  
All scripts and analysis choices were made and reviewed by the student.

Commit message:

Clarify reproducible outputs and non-versioned results directory

README.md, after:


![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue)
![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Project-Completed-brightgreen)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Academic--Use-yellow)

This project analyses patterns of self-reported anxiety using the open-access DASS-21 survey from Open Psychometrics (~39,000 respondents worldwide). It implements a fully reproducible Python pipeline that:

- cleans and standardises the raw survey data,
- produces descriptive statistics and visualisations,
- fits and compares three regression models (Linear Regression, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting) to predict anxiety scores,
- exports all figures and tables used in the technical report.

The goal is to understand how anxiety relates to demographics, personality traits (TIPI), and co-occurring symptoms (stress, depression), while being explicit about sampling and non-response bias.

## Main Features

- Clean, **modular** Python codebase (`src/` package) following best practices.
- End-to-end pipeline runnable with a **single command**.
- Automated visualisations:
  - histograms and boxplots (overall distribution, gender, age, TIPI traits, etc.),
  - geographic plots (world map by country, barplot by continent),
  - regression coefficient forest plots,
  - Random-Forest feature-importance barplot.
- Export of statistical tables in **CSV**, **PDF** and **LaTeX** formats.
- Three **regression** models for continuous anxiety scores:
  - **Linear Regression** (baseline),
  - **Random Forest** with inverse-frequency gender weights,
  - **Gradient Boosting Regressor**;
  all using the same set of predictors:
  - psychological variables (DASS Stress/Depression, TIPI traits),
  - demographic variables (gender, age group, education, urbanicity, etc.).
- Small but focused **pytest** test suite for key components.


## Setup & Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 (tested on macOS and Nuvolos/Linux)
- Python 3.10+ should work, but 3.11 is recommended

- Recommended: use a virtual environment (`venv` or `conda`)


### Installation

#### Option A — Using conda (recommended on Nuvolos)

```bash
conda create -n anxiety_ds python=3.11
conda activate anxiety_ds
git clone https://github.com/vrelvape/mental-health-anxiety-dass21.git
cd mental-health-anxiety-dass21
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
#### Option B — Using venv (generic)
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
git clone https://github.com/vrelvape/mental-health-anxiety-dass21.git
cd mental-health-anxiety-dass21
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Input data files

### 1. Main survey CSV

The main survey dataset used in this project is stored as:

- `data/mental_health_survey.csv`

If you are working from a fresh clone and this file is missing (for example, if the raw data was removed for privacy or size reasons), you can download it again from Open Psychometrics:

> Open Psychometrics – DASS-21 dataset  
> https://openpsychometrics.org/_rawdata/

The original file from Open Psychometrics is typically named `data.csv`. 

If needed, please rename it to `mental_health_survey.csv` and place it in the `data/` directory so that the pipeline can find it.


### 2. World boundaries GeoJSON (for the map figure)

One figure in this project, the choropleth “Mean Anxiety Score by Country” requires a GeoJSON file containing country boundaries.

To enable this figure, download a world countries GeoJSON file and save it as:

- `data/geo/world_countries.geojson`

For example, from the project root you can create the folder and download a compatible file with:

```bash
mkdir -p data/geo

curl -L "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/datasets/geo-countries/master/data/countries.geojson" \
  -o data/geo/world_countries.geojson
```

## How to Run the Full Pipeline

From the project root:
### **Option 1 — Standard execution (recommended)**

```bash
python main.py

```
### **Option 2 - Module execution**
```bash
python -m src.main

```

These two commands will:
- Load and clean the dataset
- Generate summary statistics and visualizations
- Export all tables to `results/tables/` and all figures to `results/figures/`

## Testing

This project includes a small but focused test suite to ensure that the core components
of the pipeline behave as expected.

From the project root, you can run all tests with:

```bash
pytest
```
To run the tests with coverage and see which parts of the code are exercised, use:
```bash
pytest --cov=src --cov-report=term-missing
```
These commands will:
- Execute unit tests for data cleaning, feature engineering and modelling components
- Report any failures or regressions in the pipeline
- (With `--cov`): show line-by-line coverage information for the `src/` package

## Reproducing the LaTex Report

```md
Note: The PDF report is provided pre-compiled for evaluation.
Recompiling the LaTeX report is optional and not required to reproduce the results.
All figures and tables used in the report are generated automatically by running `python main.py`.
```

From the `docs/`folder:

```bash
cd docs
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
biber Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
pdflatex Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex
```

## Repository Structure

```
mental-health-anxiety-dass21/
├── data/
│   └── mental_health_survey.csv        # Raw input data (DASS-21)
│
├── docs/                     
│   └── figures/                      
│   └── tables/
│   ├── Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.tex   # LaTeX source for the report
│   └── Mental_Health_Anxiety_Report.pdf   # Final technical report (compiled locally)
│
├── results/
│   ├── figures/                       # All generated figures (PNG)
│   └── tables/                        # Exported tables
│       ├── csv/
│       ├── pdf/
│       └── latex/
│
├── src/
│   ├── analysis/                      # Statistical analysis modules
│   │   ├── anova_demographics.py
│   │   ├── anova_personality.py
│   │   ├── descriptive.py
│   │   ├── ml_models.py
│   │   ├── nonresponse.py
│   │   └── regressions.py
│   │
│   ├── viz/                           # Visualisation modules
│   │   ├── anxiety_distribution.py
│   │   ├── coef_forest_plots.py
│   │   ├── demographic_boxplots.py
│   │   ├── geo_anxiety_plots.py
│   │   ├── ml_feature_importance.py
│   │   └── tipi_boxplots.py
│   │
│   ├── cleaning.py                    # Data cleaning and harmonisation
│   ├── config.py                      # Paths, constants and settings
│   ├── data_loading.py                # Raw-data loader
│   ├── export_core_tables.py          # Table export logic
│   ├── features.py                    # Feature engineering helpers
│   └── main.py                        # Pipeline entry point (python -m src.main)
│
├── tests/                             # Pytest test suite
│   └── test_*.py
│
├── AI_USAGE.md                        # Detailed disclosure of AI usage
├── PROPOSAL.md                        # Original project proposal
├── README.md                          # (this file)
├── requirements.txt                   # Python dependencies
└── .gitignore
```

## Outputs
### Note on generated outputs

The `results/` directory contains automatically generated figures and tables
produced by running `python main.py`.  
These files are **not versioned** in the repository, as they are fully
reproducible from the raw data and the provided pipeline.

For convenience and evaluation purposes, selected final figures and the
compiled PDF report are included under the `docs/` directory.

### Statistical Tables

- Mean anxiety by country
- Mean anxiety by continent
- Anxiety severity by age group, gender, and TIPI traits
- Top 10 countries by anxiety level and participant count
- Model comparison table (Linear Regression vs Random Forest vs Gradient Boosting: R² and RMSE)
- ANOVA summaries for:
  - demographic predictors,
  - TIPI personality traits.
Tables are saved under:
- `results/tables/csv/`
- `results/tables/pdf/`
- `results/tables/latex/`

### Visualizations

- Histograms (overall distribution)
- Boxplots (by gender, continent, etc.)
- Barplots (mean anxiety scores)
- Choropleth world map (mean anxiety by country)

All outputs are generated programmatically and stored in `results/figures/` and `results/tables/`.

![Choropleth Map of Anxiety by Country](docs/figures/worldmap_anxiety_by_country.png)


This map shows the average anxiety levels across countries.

## Version control & commit policy

The project was developed primarily in GitHub Codespaces, with most of the
work (data cleaning, refactoring of the pipeline, modelling and report-aligned
visualisations) being done interactively in a single environment.

Because the structure of the project was revised multiple times, using a very
fine-grained commit strategy would have produced a large number of noisy,
intermediate commits. Instead, the development workflow followed this logic:

- iterate and stabilise the main components directly in Codespaces,
- then publish the final version to the GitHub repository using a series of
  meaningful commits (at least 20, as requested in the project rules),
  corresponding to major milestones (data loading/cleaning, analyses,
  visualisations, modelling, documentation).

As a consequence, the commits in the final repository are relatively close in
time, and there are few commits whose sole purpose is to “fix a small bug”
immediately after the previous one. This is expected given the workflow above:
the actual development started on **5 November 2025** and took place almost
entirely in Codespaces before being pushed to GitHub in its final, structured
form.

## Known Limitations

This project is based on an online convenience sample from Open Psychometrics and is **not representative** of the global population. Some groups and regions are heavily over-represented (e.g., certain countries, women), while others have very small sample sizes.

All measures are **self-reported** and collected at a single time point, which means the analysis is correlational only and cannot establish causality. The DASS-21 subscales (stress, depression, anxiety) are also conceptually overlapping, so models that use all three should be interpreted with care.

Finally, the machine learning models are designed for **exploratory analysis**, not for clinical use or individual diagnosis. Their role is to highlight patterns and relative predictor importance, not to provide medical recommendations.

## Data Source

The dataset used in this project comes from:

> Open Psychometrics – DASS-21 dataset  
> https://openpsychometrics.org/_rawdata/

(See the technical report and `references.bib` for the full citation.)

## AI Disclosure

A detailed description of how AI tools were used during development is provided in [`AI_USAGE.md`](AI_USAGE.md). All final modelling decisions, code integration and interpretation of results were reviewed and validated by the student.

## License & Academic Use

This project is intended for **academic and educational purposes** only.  
Please cite the dataset source and this repository if you reuse parts of the pipeline.


## Author

Created by **Victor Aguiar Relva Pereira** for the *Data Science and Advanced Programming* course (HEC Lausanne, 2025–2026).  
All scripts and analysis choices were made and reviewed by the student.
